PRADHAN MANTRI KISAN SAMMAN NIDHI (PM.KISAN)
Frequentl v Asked Questions (FAQs)
1. What is Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi ?
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PIV-KISAN) is a new Central Sector Scheme to
provide income support to all landholding farmers' families in the country to
supplement their financial needs for procuring various inputs related to agriculture and
allied activities as well as domestic needs. Under the Scheme, the entire financial
liability towards transfer of benefit to targeted beneficiaries will be borne by
Government of Ind ia.
2. Whether the benefits of the scheme are admissible to only Small & Marginal
Farmers' (SMF) families?
No. ln the beginning when the PtV-Kisan Scheme was launched on 24i\ February,
2019, its benefits were admissible only to Small & I/larginal Farmers' (SI\4F) families,
with combined landholding upto 2 hectare. The Scheme was later on revised w.e.f.
1 .6.2019 and extended to all farmer families irrespective of the srze of their
landholdings
The PM-Kisan Scheme was launched by the Hon'ble Prime Minister on 24th February,
5. From which date the Scheme has come into effect?
The scheme takes effect from 01 .12.2018
6. Who are eligible to get benefits under the Scheme?
All landholding farmers' families, which have cultivable landholding in their names are
eligible to get benefit under the scheme
7. Who are not eligible to get benefits under the Scheme? (What are the
Exclusion Criteria under the Scheme?)Under the PM-KISAN scheme, all landholding farmers' famities shall be provided the
financial benefit of Rs.60001 per annum per family payable in three equal installments
of Rs.20001 each, every four months.3. What are the benefits of the Scheme?
The followin cateoof farmers are not eliible toet the benefits of the PM-Kisan4. When was the scheme launched?
Scheme
(a) All lnstitutional Land holders; and
(b) Farmer families in which one or more of its members belong to following
categories:-
i. Former and present holders of constitutional posts
ii. Former and present ltlinisters/ State Ministers and former/present
Members of Lok sabha/ Rajya sabha/ state Legislative Assemblies/ State
Legislative councils, former and present tt/ayors of Municipal corporations,
former and present Chairpersons of District Panchayats.
iii. All serving or retired officers and employees of Central/ State
Government tvliniitries /Offices/Departments and its field units Central or State
PSEs and Attached offices /Autonomous lnstitutions under Government as
well as regular employees of the Local Bodies (Excluding Multi Tasking staff /
Class lV/Group D employees)
iv. All su pe ran n uated/retired pensioners
Rs.10,000/-or more(Excluding Ir/ulti Tasking
em ployees)
All Persons who paid lncome Tax in last assessment year
vi. Professionals like Doctors, Engineers' Lawyers, Chartered
Accountants, and Architects registered with Professional bodies and carrying
out profession by undertaking practices.
8. How many times the benefit will be given in a year?
Under the Plv-KlsAN scheme, all landholding farmers' families shall be provided the
financial benefit of Rs.6000/- per annum per family payable in three equal installments
of Rs.200O/- each, every four months. The period of 1't installment under the scheme
is from 01 .12 2O18 to 31 03 2019, that of 2nd installment from 01 04.2019 to
31 07 .2019,3'd installment from 01 08.2019 to 30 11 2019, and so on
9. Whether an employee of the Central/State Government / PSU / Autonomous
Organization, etc., who holds cultivable land in his/her own name in villages, is
eligible to get the benefit under the scheme?
No. All serving or retired officers and employees of central / state Government
lVlinistries / Offices / Departments and their field units, Central or State PSEs and
Attached offices / Autonomous lnstitutions under Government as well as regular
employees of the Local Bodies are not eligible to get benefit under the schemewhose monthly Pension
Staff / Class lV/GrouPIS
D
However servrnor retired tvlu lti TaskinStaffI\NTS/ Class lV / GrouDemloS
are eligible to get benefit under the Scheme, provided their families are otherwise
eligible and not covered under other exclusion criteria.
10. Will any individual or farmer family owning more than 2 hectare of cultivable
land get any benefit under the scheme?
Yes. The ambit of the scheme has been extended to cover all farmer families,
irrespective of the size of their land holdings.
11. What will happen if the beneficiary gives incorrect declaration for the
implementation of the Scheme?
ln case of incorrect declaration, the beneficiary shall be liable for recovery of
transferred financjal benefit and other penal actions as per law.
12. What is the cutoff date for determination of eligibility of beneficiaries under
the scheme?
The cut-off date for determination of eligibility of beneficiaries under the scheme is
01 .02.2019 and no changes thereafter shall be considered for eligibility of benefit
under the scheme for next 5 years, except transfer of land on succession in case of
death of landholder.
13. Whether the scheme benefits will be allowed in cases where transfer of
ownership of cultivable land takes place after the cut-off date of 01.02.2019 on
account of succession due to death of the landowner?
Yes. The Scheme benefits will be allowed in all such cases where transfer of
ownership of cultivable land has taken place after the cut-off date of 01.02.20'19 on
account of succession due to death of the landowner.
15. ls an income tax payee farmer or his / her spouse eligible to get benefit
under the scheme?14. Whether transfer of ownership occurred between 01.12.2018 and 31.01.2019
are eligible for consideration?
ln cases where transfer of ownership of cultivabie land has happened between
01 .12.2018 and 31.01 .2019 due to any reasons such as purchase, successlon, will,
gift, etc., the first installment during the financial year (2018-19) shall be of
proportionate amount from date of transfer till 31 .03.2019 with respect to the 4 months
period, provided the families are otherwise eligible as per scheme guidelines.
No. rf anmember of the familis income taxaee in last assessment ear, then the
family is not eligible for benefit under the scheme
16. What is the definition of 'family' under the Scheme?
A landholder farmer's family is defined as "a family comprising of husband, wife and
minor children who own cultivable land as per the land records of the concerned
State/UT". The existing land-ownership system will be used for identification of
beneficiaries for calculation of benefit.
17. ls any person / farmer who is not having land holding in his / her own name,
but is cultivating land owned by his / her father / forefathers is eligible to get
benefit under the Scheme?
No. The land must be in his / her own name. lf the land ownership has been
transferred in his / her name on account of succession then he / she will be eligible.
No. Land holding is the sole criteria to avail the benefit under the Scheme
19. How the beneficiaries under the Scheme will be identified and shortlisted for
payment of intended benefit?
The responsibility of identifying the eligible farmers' families for benefit under the
scheme is entirely of the State/UT Governments. The prevailing land-ownership
system / record of land in different States/Union Territories will be used to identify the
intended beneficiaries for transfer of scheme benefits.
20. What is the mandatory information required to be submitted on PM-KISAN
portal for the transfer of benefits?
The following informatron / documents are requlred to be furnished by the farmers for
enrollment under PI\/-Kisan Scheme
(i) Name, Age, Gender and Category (SC/ST)(ii) Aadhaar Number [except in case of farmers in the States of Assam, lr/eghalaya
and J&K (now UTs of J&K and Laddakh), where Aadhaar number has not
been issued to most of the citizens, and therefore these States have been
exempted from the requirement till 31't N/arch, 2020. ln these States / UTs,
Aadhaar number shall be collected for those beneficiaries where it is available
and for others alternate prescribed documents can be collected for identity
verification purposes by the States/UT Governments, like Aadhaar Enrollment18. ls any person / farmer who is cultivating a land but is not having the land
holding in his / her own name, for example tenant farmers, is eligible to get
benefit under the Scheme?
(iii)
(iv)Number and / or any other prescribed documents for purposes of the
identification such as Driving Licence, Voters' lD Card, NREGA Job Card, or
any other identification documents issued by Central/State/UT Governments
or their authoritres, etc.)
Bank Account Number and IFSC Code.
[\tlobile number - though it is not mandatory but it is advised that when available
it may be provided so that the information related to transfer of benefit can be
communicated.
21. How does a landholder farmers'family know that his / her name is included
in the list of beneficiaries?
The beneficiary lists would be displayed at Panchayats to ensure greater transparency
and information. Further, States/UTs would notify the sanction of benefit to the
beneficiary through system generated SlVlS. He / she can also ascertain his status
through the Farmers Corner in the PIV-Kisan portal.
22. What is the remedy available for eligible beneficiary if his/her name is not
included in the list of beneficiaries?
All such farmer families whose names are not included in the list of beneficiaries can
approach the District Level Grievance Redressal Monitoring Committee in their
Districts for inclusion of their names in the beneficiary list. Further, the Government
has created an exclusive Farmers' Corner in the PM-KISAN web-portal
www.pmkisan.gov.in giving the following facilities to the farmers through three
separate options / links:-
New Farmer's Registration - Through this link, the farmers can submit
their details online. The online Form has certain mandatory fields as well
self-declaration regarding the eligibility. Once the Form is filled in and
submitted successfully by the farmer, the same is forwarded by an
automated process to the State Nodal Officer (SNO) for verification. The
SNO verifies the details filled in by the farmer and uploads the verified
data on the PM-KISAN portal. Thereafter the data is processed through
an established system for payment.
Edit Aadhaar details - Through this link the farmer can edit his/ her
name himself/ herself as per details in the Aadhaar Card. The edited
name then gets updated after authentication through the system.(ii)
(iii)Beneficiary Status - Through this link, by quoting their Aadhaar Number
or Bank Account Number or the registered Mobile Number, the
beneficiaries can themselves ascertain the status of payment of their
installments.
23. ln case of landholding owned by family members are spread across different
revenue records in the same or different villa how the es, districts States(i)
ln such cases, the farmer's family will entitled to get the benefit at one place only. The
State Nodal Officers (SNOs) will ensure that no duplicate payments are released to
any family.benefit will be transferred to the family?
24. lf there are multiple farmers' families whose names are recorded on a single
landholding whether each farmer's family is eligible to get benefit of the
scheme? lf so, what is the quantum of minimum financial benefit that such
families will get under the scheme?
Each of such farmer family would be separately eligible for the benefit under the
scheme upto the extent of Rs. 60001 provided they are otherwise eligible as per
scheme guidelines.
25. Will be monetary benefit under the Scheme be directly credited into
beneficiary accounts?
Yes. The financial benefit under the scheme shall be directly credited into bank
accounts of beneficiaries.
26. Whether it
details?is compulsory for beneficiaries to give their bank account
Yes, the beneficiaries are required to provide their bank account details along with
their Aadhaar number so as to credit the financial benefit under the scheme directly
into their bank accounts. No benefit can be given if bank account details have not
been provided.
27. Whether giving Aadhaar details is mandatory for availing benefit under the
Scheme?
Aadhaar number was optional and not mandatory for release of 1st installment
pertaining to the period 01 .12.2018 to 31.03.2019, whereas only possession of Aadhaar
number was made mandatory for release of 2nd installment pertaining to the period
01 .04.2019 to 31 .07.2019. Further, Aadhaar seeding of beneficiaries' data was made
mandatory for release of 3'o installment pertaining to the period 01.08.2019, and for
subsequent installments onwards. Recently, however, Government has relaxed the
mandatory requirement of Aadhaar seeding of beneficiaries' data upto 30.1 1.20'19. This
mandatory requirement of Aadhaar seeding of the beneficiaries' data would continue to
applicable for release of all installments w.e.f . O1 .12.2019. However, Assam,
Meghalaya and Jammu & Kashmir, where Aadhaar penetration has not been much,
have been given exemption from this mandatory requirement till 31.03.2020.
28. Can States/UTs rovide certified lists of beneficiaries on the PM KISANI
Portal in phases or in batches as and when they are finalized?
Yes, States/UTs can provide list of eligible beneficiaries as and when they are
finalized based on the eligibility criteria in batches/ph rases. The benefits will be
released on regular basis based on the approved list provided by the States/UTs.
29. Whether farmers in villages situated in urban areas are eligible for the benefit
of the Scheme?
There is no distinction between urban and rural cultivable land under the scheme. Both
are covered under the scheme, provided that land situated in urban areas is under
actual cultivation.
30. Whether micro land holdings are admissible for availing the benefit of the
Scheme?
Micro land holdings, which are not cultivable, are excluded from the benefit under the
scheme.
31. What is the prescribed mechanism for validation of information / declaration
furnished by the beneficiaries?
The State/UT Governments are free to decide about the appropriate mechanism /
authority for validation of information / declaration furnrshed by the beneficiary.
32. What is the cut-off date for 'minor' children becoming 'major' under the
Scheme?
The cuLoff date for'minor' children becoming 'major' is 01 .02.2019
33. Whether farmers may avail the benefit of the Scheme against agricultural land
being used for non -ag ricu ltu ral purposes?
No. Agricultural land being used for non-agricultural purposes will not be covered for
benefit under the scheme.
34. What is the procedure of release of installments to the beneficiaries?
a) An exclusive web-portal, namely, www. pmkisan.qov. in has been created for
uploadrng of beneficiaries' data by the State / UT Governments.
b) The eligible farmers may apply with the village Patwaris, revenue officials or other
designated officers / agencies and submit their required details to them.
c) Nodal Officers appointed by State / UT Governments at Block lfduk I District level
process the data and transfer them to State Nodal Officers (SNOs).
d) State Nodal Officers finally authenticate the data and upload them in batches from
time{o-time on the portal.
asses throuha The data of beneficiaries uloaded bI
the State Nodal Officers
multi-level verification by the National lnformatics Centre (NlC), the Public Finance
Management System (PF[MS) and the banks.
f,1 Based on the verified / validated data the SNOs sign the Request For Transfer
(RFT) of fund containing the total number of beneficiaries contained in a particular
batch and total amount of fund to be transferred for that batch, and upload it on the
portal.
g) Based on the RFT, the PFMS issues a Fund Transfer Order (FTO).
h) Based on the FTO, the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare
rssues the sanction order for the amount mentioned in the FTO.
g) The amount is transferred to the bank accounts of the beneficiaries, held in
destination banks, through the accredited bank of Department and the sponsoring
bank of the State/UT Governments, using the PFIMS portal. The destination bank
can be a Schedule Bank, Post office, Rural Bank, Cooperative Bank or any other
Frnancial lnstitution. The entire banking transaction is managed and monitored by
the National Payment Corporation of lndia (NPCI).
35. If a farmer registered under the Scheme does not receive any installment in
any 4-monthly period for any reason, whether he / she will be able to receive the
same later on?
Yes. The beneficiaries, whose names are uploaded on P[\/-Kisan portal by the
concerned State / UT Governments in a particular 4-monthly period, shall be entitled to
receive the benefit for that period with effect from that 4-monthly period itself. lf they do
not receive the payment of installment pertaining to that 4-monthly period and
subsequent installments for any reason, except due to rejection for falling within the
exclusion criteria, they are entitled to receive the benefits of all the due installments as
and when the cause of delay is removed / resolved. For example, if an eligible farmer's
name has been uploaded on the PIV-KISAN portal by the State / UT Government
during the 4-monthly period of December. 2018 - l\/arch, 2019, he/she is entitled to get
the installment pertaining to December, 2018 - lVarch, 20'19 period, and also all
subsequent installments. Further. if the eligible farmer's name is uploaded on the PIV-
KISAN portal during the 4-monthly period of April-July, 2019, he/she is entitled to get
the installment pertarning to April-July, 2019 period and also all subsequent
installments.
lVlany beneficiaries, who have received installments pertaining to December, 2018 -
IMarch, 2019 period and April-July, 2019 period were not able to receive the installment
pertaining to August,-November, 2019 period. The reason for this delay was the
mandatory requirement of release of all installments pertaining to the 4-monthly period
August-November, 2019 and onwards only on the basis of Aadhaar seeded data of
beneficiaries. This work of Aadhaar seeding of data of beneficiaries had not been
completed by many State /UT Governments. Therefore, the Central Government
uirement till 30th November, 2019. The State / UT relaxed this mandato reI
Governments are required to complete the work of Aadhaar seeding of 100%
beneficiaries by 30th November, 2019, so that the beneficiaries are able to receive the
installment pertaining to the 4-monthly period of December, 2019 - March, 2020, and
all subsequent installments. Beneficiaries in the States of Assam, Meghalaya and J&K
(now UTs of J&K and Laddakh) have been exempted from all Aadhaar related
requirements till 31't IVIarch, 2020, by which time these States are also required to
complete the process of Aadhaar enrollment of all eligible farmers as well as Aadhaar
seeding of their data under this Scheme.